README.md, before:

# KewHybSeqWorkshop
Tutorials and materials for planning a HybSeq project, processing sequences, and conducting phylogenomic analyses.

### Workshop at Kew Royal Botanic Gardens, London, UK
_May 15-17, 2017_

### Instructors

[Norman Wickett](http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/wickett/), Conservation Scientist, Chicago Botanic Garden

[Matt Johnson](www.mossmatters.com), Post-Doctoral Research Associate, Chicago Botanic Garden

[Elliot Gardner](http://www.plantbiology.northwestern.edu/people/graduate-students/elliot-gardner.html), Ph.D. Candidate, Northwestern University

### Organizers

[Lisa Pokorny](http://www.kew.org/science/who-we-are-and-what-we-do/people/lisa-pokorny), Phylogenomic Research Fellow, Kew Royal Botanic Gardens

[Steven Dodsworth](http://www.kew.org/science/who-we-are-and-what-we-do/people/steven-dodsworth), Senior Researcher (PAFTOL), Kew Royal Botanic Garden

## Workshop Description

Hyb-Seq ([Weitemier et al., 2014](http://www.bioone.org/doi/abs/10.3732/apps.1400042)) combines targeted sequencing of thousands of low-copy nuclear exons and flanking regions evolving across a range of different rates —as well as genome skimming of high-copy repeats and organellar genomes— to efficiently produce genome-scale data sets for phylogenomics. A new angiosperm-wide Hyb-Seq enrichment probe kit is being developed at Kew (in collaboration with [MYcroarray](mycroarray.com)), in the context of [PAFTOL] (http://science.kew.org/strategic-output/plant-and-fungal-trees-life), based on transcriptome (generated by the [oneKP project](www.onekp.com)) and genome data ([Phytozome](https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/)). This workshop will explain how to successfully implement Hyb-Seq all the way from kit design, to lab does and don’ts, data post-processing, and phylogenomic inference. 

## Workshop Objectives

Following the workshop, participants should be able to:
1.	Describe the entire HybSeq process, from bait design and lab work through phylogenetic analysis.2.	Design a HybSeq study and accurately estimate the cost to complete it.3.	Select appropriate markers for a HybSeq probe set.4.	Choose appropriate DNA extraction and library preparation strategies 5.	Decide on an appropriate pooling and sequencing strategy, taking into account both the cost savings and risks of increased multiplexing.6.	Assembly raw sequences into a usable data set.7.	Choose and carry out appropriate phylogenetic and/or population genetic analyses of assembled data.

## HybSeq 101

Slides

## Designing HybSeq Probes

Slides

[Tutorial](Markerminer.md)

## Project Planning and Costs

Slides

## From Tissues to DNA

Slides

## Library Construction and Pooling Strategies

Slides

## Processing Reads

Slides

[Tutorial](Processing_HybSeq_Illumina_Reads.md)

## From reads to sequences with HybPiper

[Tutorial](HybPiper.md)

## Module 7: Phylogenomic Analysis

Slides

Tutorial

## Module 8: From HybSeq to SNPs with GATK

Slides

Tutorial

Commit message:

First draft of Markerminer tutorial

README.md, after:

# HybSeq: Wet-lab tips and dry-lab skills

### Workshop at Kew Royal Botanic Gardens, London, UK
_May 17-19, 2017_

### Instructors

[Norman Wickett](http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/wickett/), Conservation Scientist, Chicago Botanic Garden

[Matt Johnson](www.mossmatters.com), Post-Doctoral Research Associate, Chicago Botanic Garden

[Elliot Gardner](http://www.plantbiology.northwestern.edu/people/graduate-students/elliot-gardner.html), Ph.D. Candidate, Northwestern University

### Organizers

[Lisa Pokorny](http://www.kew.org/science/who-we-are-and-what-we-do/people/lisa-pokorny), Phylogenomic Research Fellow, Kew Royal Botanic Gardens

[Steven Dodsworth](http://www.kew.org/science/who-we-are-and-what-we-do/people/steven-dodsworth), Senior Researcher (PAFTOL), Kew Royal Botanic Garden

## Workshop Description

Hyb-Seq ([Weitemier et al., 2014](http://www.bioone.org/doi/abs/10.3732/apps.1400042)) combines targeted sequencing of thousands of low-copy nuclear exons and flanking regions evolving across a range of different rates —as well as genome skimming of high-copy repeats and organellar genomes— to efficiently produce genome-scale data sets for phylogenomics. A new angiosperm-wide Hyb-Seq enrichment probe kit is being developed at Kew (in collaboration with [MYcroarray](mycroarray.com)), in the context of [PAFTOL](http://science.kew.org/strategic-output/plant-and-fungal-trees-life), based on transcriptome (generated by the [oneKP project](www.onekp.com)) and genome data ([Phytozome](https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/)). This workshop will explain how to successfully implement Hyb-Seq all the way from kit design, to lab does and don’ts, data post-processing, and phylogenomic inference. 

## Workshop Objectives

Following the workshop, participants should be able to:
1.	Describe the entire HybSeq process, from bait design and lab work through phylogenetic analysis.2.	Design a HybSeq study and accurately estimate the cost to complete it.3.	Select appropriate markers for a HybSeq probe set.4.	Choose appropriate DNA extraction and library preparation strategies 5.	Decide on an appropriate pooling and sequencing strategy, taking into account both the cost savings and risks of increased multiplexing.6.	Assembly raw sequences into a usable data set.7.	Choose and carry out appropriate phylogenetic and/or population genetic analyses of assembled data.

## Workshop Resources

All tutorials and slide decks are freely available with an MIT License at: https://github.com/mossmatters/KewHybSeqWorkshop

The workshop relies on Cyverse Atmosphere, a cloud computing project sponsored by the National Science Foundation. Accounts for educational purposes are free. Sign up and request Atmosphere access at: https://user.cyverse.org 

We created a Cyverse Atmosphere image, `HybSeq_Kew_Workshop`, that contains all of the software needed to run the following tutorials. All software installed on the Atmosphere image is open source and free to use for educational purposes. 

[Click here for a workshop-specific Atmosphere tutorial](Atmosphere.md).


## HybSeq 101

Slides

## Designing HybSeq Probes

Slides

[Tutorial](Markerminer.md)

## Project Planning and Costs

Slides

## From Tissues to DNA

Slides

## Library Construction and Pooling Strategies

Slides

## Processing Reads

Slides

[Tutorial](Processing_HybSeq_Illumina_Reads.md)

## From reads to sequences with HybPiper

[Tutorial](HybPiper.md)

## Module 7: Phylogenomic Analysis

Slides

Tutorial

## Module 8: From HybSeq to SNPs with GATK

Slides

Tutorial

---

![](http://www.cyverse.org/sites/default/files/PoweredbyCyverse_LogoSquare_0_0.png)
